---
layout: narrative
title: Lecture 1
---
Main source will be Pierre Simon's *A guide to NIP theories*.
## Overview of the course
- Preliminaries and conventions
- Shelah's eq construction and elimination of imaginaries
- NIP: first properties and reduction to one variable
- Invariant types
- Honest definitions and the Shelah expansion
- dp-rank and dp-minimal theories
- Forking in NIP theories
- Connected components in definable groups


## Preliminaries and conventions
$$\mathcal L$$ will be a first-order language. $$T$$ will be a $$\mathcal L$$-theory, most of the time complete. We will always write $$\vert T \vert$$ to mean $$\max \{\vert \mathcal L \vert, \aleph_0\}$$. We will write $$x,y$$ for tuples of variables and $$a, b$$ for tuples of elements of a structure; by $$\vert x \vert$$ we will mean the length of $$x$$. If $$\mathcal M = (M, \dots)$$ is an $$\mathcal L$$-theory, and $$A \subseteq M$$, then we write $$a \in A$$ for $$a \in A^{\vert a\vert}$$.
If $$\varphi(x,y)$$ is some $$\mathcal L$$-formula, $$\mathcal M \vDash T$$, $$b \in M$$, $$A \subseteq M$$, then
$$ \varphi(A,b) = \{a \in A \vert \mathcal M \vDash \varphi(a,b)\}. $$
Recall that
- $$\mathcal M \vDash T$$ is $$\kappa$$-saturated if for any $$A \subseteq M$$ of size $$< \kappa$$ all $$1$$-types over $$A$$ are realized in $$\mathcal M$$,
- $$\mathcal M \vDash T$$ is strongly $$\kappa$$-homogeneous if every partial elementary map $$f: A \to M$$ with domain $$A \subseteq M$$ of size $$< \kappa$$ extends to an automorphism of $$\mathcal M$$.

**Theorem 0.1**. If $$T$$ is a complete $$\mathcal L$$-theory and $$\kappa$$ is a cardinal, then there exists a $$\kappa$$-saturated, strongly $$\kappa$$-homogenous model of $$T$$.
**Remark.** $$\kappa$$-saturated models are $$\kappa^+$$-universal, i.e. every $$\mathcal N \equiv \mathcal M$$ of size $$\leq \kappa$$ can be elementarily embedded in the saturated model.

**Convention 0.2.** We fix $$\bar\kappa$$ some very large cardinal and $$\mathcal U \vDash T$$ a fixed $$\bar\kappa$$-saturated, strongly $$\bar\kappa$$-homogenous model. By a "model of $$T$" we will mean an elementary substructure $$\mathcal M \preceq \mathcal U$$ of size $$< \bar\kappa$$. Parameter sets $$A \subseteq M$$ will always be of size $$< \bar\kappa$$ ("small"). We will always write $$\vDash \varphi(a)$$ to mean $$\mathcal U \vDash \varphi(a)$$.

**Proposition 0.3.** For $$A \subseteq \mathcal U$$ and $$a, b \in \mathcal U$$,
1. $$\mathrm{tp}(a/A) = \mathrm{tp}(b/A)$$ if and only if there is $$\sigma \in \mathrm{Aut}_A = \mathrm{Aut}(\mathcal U/A)$$ such that $$\sigma a = b$$.
2. $$\mathrm{dcl}(A) = \{a \in \mathcal U \mid \sigma a = a, \; \forall \sigma \in \mathrm{Aut}_A\}$$,
3. $$\mathrm{acl}(A)$$ is the set of elements with finite orbit under the $$\mathrm{Aut}_A$$-action.

## Imaginary elements and classification of imaginaries
If $$\mathcal M$$ is an $$\mathcal L$$-structure and $$E(x,y)$$ is a definable equivalence relation on $$M^n$$, then any element of the form $$a/E$$ is called an *imaginary*. Tuples from $$M$$ are called *real*.

**Motivation.** treat definable quotients in a first-order setting; codes for definable sets (see below).

**Lemma 1.1.** Suppose $$D = \varphi(\mathcal U,b) \subseteq \mathcal U^n$$. If $$D$$ is $$A$$-invariant for some $$A$$, then it is $$A$$-definable.

*Proof.* Let $$B = Ab$$ and $$X = \langle \varphi(x,b) \rangle \subseteq S_n(B)$$. For any $$q \in X$$, the type $$p = q\vert_A$$ implies $$\varphi(x,b)$$: this is because for any $$a \vDash q$$, then for any $$\sigma \in \mathrm{Aut}_A$$ one has $$\vDash \varphi(\sigma a,b)$$. On the other hand, every realization of $$p$$ is of the form $$\sigma a$$ for some $$a$$ and some $$\sigma \in \mathrm{Aut}_A$$, so in particular $$p(x) \vDash \varphi(x,b)$$. This implication is witnessed by some $$\psi_q(x) \in p$$. This holds for $$q$$ arbitrary, so then $$\langle \varphi(x,b) \rangle = \bigcup_{q \in X} \langle \psi_q(x) \rangle$$, and so by compactness we extract a finite subcover given by $$\psi_{q_1}, \dots \psi_{q_k}$$. But this gives an $$A$$-definition of $$D$$. $$\square$

**Definition.** A canonical parameter for a definable set $$D$$ is a tuple $$d$$ such that, for any $$\sigma \in \mathrm{Aut}(\mathcal U)$$, one has $$\sigma(d) = d$$ if and only if $$\sigma(D) = D$$.

**Remark.** Canonical parameters are only determined up to inter-definability. A *code* for $$D$$ is a choice of a canonical parameter for $$D$$.

**Examples 1.3.** (canonical parameters need not exist)
1. If $$T$$ is the theory of an equivalence relation with infinitely many equivalence classes, all infinite, in $$\mathcal L = \{E\}$$, then $$T$$ is complete, with QE. The definable set $$a/E$$, for any choice of $$a$$, does not admit a canonical parameter.
- Certainly the empty tuple is not a canonical parameter, because there is always $$\sigma \in \mathrm{Aut}(\mathcal U)$$ such that $$\vDash \neg E(\sigma(a),a)$$.
- Any tuple $$d = (d_1, \dots d_n)$$ will also not be a canonical parameter, because we can always find $$\sigma$$ that fixes $$D$$ setwise but such that $$\sigma(d_1) \neq d_1$$.
2. If $$T$$ is the theory of an infinite set in the empty language, and $$D = \{a,b\}$$ for some $$a\neq b$$, then $$D$$ has no canonical parameter.
- Such a parameter would need to contain both $$a$$ and $$b$$ as coordinates.
- One can find a map $$\sigma$$ that sends $$a$$ to b$$, $$b$$ to $$a$$, fixes all $$c \notin D$$, fixes $$D$$ setwise, but does not fix the parameter.

**Definition.** $$T$$ eliminates imaginaries (IE) if for any $$\emptyset$$-definable equivalence relation $$E$$, every class $$a/E$$ admits a code.

**Proposition 1.4.** $$T$$ has IE if and only if any definable set has a canonical parameter.
*Proof.* One direction is obvious; as for the other, suppose $$\varphi(x,y)$$ is a $$\mathcal L$$-formula and $$D = \varphi(\mathcal U,b)$$. Define the following equivalence relation: $$y E_\varphi y'$$ if and only if $$\forall x(\varphi(x,y) \iff \varphi(x,y'))$$. Then $$E_\varphi$$ is $$\emptyset$$-definable and for any $$\sigma \in \mathrm{Aut}(\mathcal U)$$, $$\sigma(D) = D$$ if and only if $$\sigma(b/E_\varphi) = b/E_\varphi$$. Any canonical parameter $$d$$ for $$b/E_\varphi$$ will then be a canonical parameter for $$D$$. $$\square$$

**Remark 1.5.** for a theory $$T$$ one can define the Morleyization $$T_{\mathrm{Morley}}$$ which "forcefully" eliminates quantifiers; we will define $$T^{\mathrm{eq}}$$ to "forcefully" eliminate imaginaries.
